# Internationalisation (i18n)

The language is set using `language=XX` in the incoming request and this sets a session variable `language`.
If the session variable isn't set, the client-browser language string from the f3 variable LANGUAGE is used.
*Note* that the f3 var LANG is set and used rather than LANGUAGE to ensure the language is 2 characters and a single entry.

## Translations

Translations with the main application are made using GNU gettext. Templates can use it also or can be re-written specifically in a different language.  If no template file exists in the target language, the default 'en' version is used.

To create text for translation, wrap the string in `_()`, e.g. `_("Hello")`

PHP comments on the preceding line are included in the translation `.pot` file.

e.g.

```
// 'free' is meant in the context of libre in this case
$message = _("The source-code is free.");
```

### Translating Routes

Copy the routes to translate from `app/config/routes-en.ini` to `app/config/routes-XX.ini` where XX contains the translated routes in the target language.

### Translating Templates

Copy the folders/paths to translate from `app/templates/en` to `app/templates/XX` where XX is the target language.

### Translating Application Strings

Scan files for strings and create the `messages.po` output file.

### gettext - Initial Setup

From the project root folder execute:

```
> xgettext --from-code=UTF-8 -d i18n -c -i -s -L php -D . -o app/i18n/messages.pot `find app/ -type f -iname "*.ph*"`
```

Use `-j` option to join to an existing file.

```
> mkdir -p app/i18n/en/LC_MESSAGES app/i18n/es/LC_MESSAGES
> find app/i18n -type d -name LC_MESSAGES -exec cp app/i18n/messages.pot {}/ \;
> find app/i18n -type d -name LC_MESSAGES -exec msgfmt {}/messages.pot -o {}/messages.mo \;
```

### gettext - Updating translations
